
=head1 NAME

Statistics::Descriptive - Module of basic descriptive statistical functions.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Statistics::Descriptive;
  $stat = new Statistics::Descriptive;
  $stat->AddData(1,2,3,4);
  $mean = $stat->Mean();
  $var  = $stat->Variance();
  $tm  =  $stat->TrimmedMean(.25);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module provides basic functions used in descriptive statistics. 
It has an object oriented design and supports two different modes of
data storage and calculations; sparse and full. With the sparse
method, none of the data is stored and only a few statistical
measures are available. Using the full method, the entire data set 
is retained and additional functions are available.

=head1 SPARSE FUNCTIONS

=over 5

=item sparse

Create a new sparse statistics variable. 

=item AddData

Adds data to the statistics variable. The cached statistical values are 
updated automatically.

=item Count

Returns the number of data items.

=item Mean     

Returns the mean of the data.

=item Sum

Returns the sum of the data.

=item Variance

Returns the variance of the data.  Division by n-1 is used.

=item StandardDeviation

Returns the standard deviation of the data. Division by n-1 is used.

=back

=head1 FULL FUNCTIONS

=over 5

=item new

Create a new statistics element. All the data is retained and
all defined functions are available.

=item full

Synonymous with new.

=item AddData

Adds data to the statistics variable. The only variables which
are automatically updated and re-cached are C<Count>, C<Mean>, C<Sum>,
C<Variance>, and C<StandardDeviation>. All other previously cached 
results are deleted since with the addition of new data they are no 
longer valid.

=item Other Functions

In addition to the functions mentioned in the sparse section, the following 
functions are also available when using full variables.

=item GetData

Returns a copy of the data.

=item Max

Returns the maximum value in the data set.

=item Min

Returns the minimum value in the data set.

=item SampleRange

Returns the sample range of the data.

=item Median

Returns the median value of the data.

=item HarmonicMean

Returns the harmonic mean of the data.

=item GeometricMean

Returns the geometric mean of the data.

=item Mode

Returns the mode of the data. 

=item TrimmedMean

C<TrimmedMean(trim)> returns the mean with a fraction C<trim> 
of entries at each end dropped. C<TrimmedMean(ltrim,utrim)> 
returns the mean after a fraction C<ltrim> has been removed from the
lower end of the data and a fraction C<utrim> has been removed from the
upper end of the data.

=item FrequencyDistribution

C<FrequencyDistribution(partitions)> slices the data into C<partition>
sets and counts the number of items that fall into each partition. It
returns an associative array where the keys are the numerical values of the 
partitions used. The minimum value of the data set is not a key and
the maximum value of the data set is always a key. The number of
entries for a particular partition key are the number of items which are 
greater than the previous partition key and less then or equal to the current 
partition key. As an example, 

   $stat->AddData(1,1.5,2,2.5,3,3.5,4);
   %f = $stat->FrequencyDistribution(2);
   for (sort {$a <=> $b} keys %f) {
      print "key = $_, count = $f{$_}\n";
   }

prints

   key = 2.5, count = 4
   key = 4, count = 3

since there are four items less than or equal to 2.5, and 3 items
greater than 2.5 and less than 4.

=item LeastSquaresFit

C<LeastSquaresFit()> performs a least squares fit on the data, assuming
a domain of 1,2,3... It returns an array of two elements; the value in the 
zeroth position is the constant (x^0) term and the value in the first 
position is the coeffiecient of the x^1 term. C<LeastSquaresFit(@x)> uses 
the values in C<@x> as the domain.

=back

=head1 REFERENCES

The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 2, Donald Knuth.

Handbook of Mathematica Functions, Milton Abramowitz and Irene Stegun.

Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences, Jay Devore.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1994,1995 Jason Kastner <jason@wagner.com>. All rights reserved. 
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it 
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 REVISION HISTORY

=item v1.1

April 1995 - Added LeastSquaresFit and FrequencyDistribution.

=item v1.0 

March 1995 - Released to comp.lang.perl and placed on archive sites.

=item v.20

December 1994 - Complete rewrite after extensive and invaluable e-mail 
correspondence with Anno Siegel.

=item v.10

December 1994 - Initital concept, released to perl5-porters list.

